---
title: "Battery Life"
category: phone
description: "A tale of three phones"
---

The one great thing about feature phones was their battery life. The one
terrible thing about smartphones is their battery life.

I will never understand the market that created phones that can't stay charged
for even 24 hours.

## An old phone

Here is an old smartphone I used to have:

![An old phone that fit nicely in my hand](/assets/img/battery-life/before.jpg){:class="img-fluid"}

It was a Motorola Something Or Other. It was kind of neat. It had a little HDMI
port so you could plug it into a TV and watch movies. It was also dual-core
which was very special at the time.

See how nicely it fit in my hand?

I was about to go on an extended trip to a place where I needed the phone to
last more than 24 hours at a time. I'm sure you can guess how much it matters if
a phone fits nicely in your hand when the battery is dead at the most critical
moment.

So I did this:

![That phone after giving it a hulking battery](/assets/img/battery-life/after.jpg){:class="img-fluid"}

It no longer fit nicely in my hand. It weighed so much that the back case
cracked once after I accidentally dropped it from only waist level.

But guess what?

It lasted for days at a time.

And it was worth it.

## A new phone

Fast forward to a couple of years ago. That phone was long gone and I had
upgraded to the Pixel 3. The Pixel 3 was the best phone I had ever owned. It was
fast. It took better pictures than iPhones. It didn't have any bloatware but was
stock vanilla untarnished Android. It came with more frequent software updates
than any other phone, and straight from the horse's mouth (no
waiting-on-the-carrier nonsense). I could _wash_ this phone. I was so excited I
didn't even notice the battery didn't last very long.

It fit so nicely in my hand.

Fast forward to just recently. The Pixel 3 had seen better days. I had smushed
the camera module while it was in my pocket by leaning too hard against
something, so it didn't take pictures right. A stock vanilla Android experience
was no longer unique but lots of other phone manufacturers were doing it too.
Software updates were becoming less and less significant as Android stabilized.
And it was no longer waterproof. In fact water had seeped into it while it was
in my pocket at the beach, and normal things were broken like the proximity
detector&mdash;I couldn't dial extensions or even hang up a call.

And I was getting tired of having to bring a charger with me everywhere I went.

Its time was up. So I traded it in.

## The best phone

And in its place I got a Moto G Power.

You'll recognize that "Moto G" is not a name associated with quality and luxury.
Well, because of a deal it was even cheaper. It was so cheap it was more than
free after trading in the worn out Pixel 3. It is noticeably slower. It takes
very average pictures. It isn't waterproof. It has a lot of plastic inside and
out. It's a little too large for even my large hands.

But guess what? I can get the battery to last for _more than three days_:

![More than three days of battery life](/assets/img/battery-life/long-battery-life.png){:class="img-fluid"}

___With normal usage___.

This is the best phone I have ever owned.