---
title: "WebAssembly's Name"
category: programming
description: "Is it for the web? Is it assembly?"
comments: 7
---

Here's what [WebAssembly](https://webassembly.org/){:target="_blank"} has to say
about itself:

> WebAssembly (abbreviated Wasm) is a binary instruction format for a
  stack-based virtual machine. Wasm is designed as a portable compilation target
  for programming languages, enabling deployment on the web for client and
  server applications.

I've been learning WASM recently. I think I'm coming out of the
[Trough of Disillusionment](https://www.gartner.com/en/research/methodologies/gartner-hype-cycle){:target="_blank"}.
Let me explain why.

## Hype: it's not just web!

First, you need to understand that
[it isn't limited to just the internet](https://webassembly.org/docs/non-web/){:target="_blank"}:

> While WebAssembly is designed to run on the Web, it is also desirable for it
  to be able to execute well in other environments, including everything from
  minimal shells for testing to full-blown application environments e.g. on
  servers in datacenters, on IoT devices, or mobile/desktop apps. It may even be
  desirable to execute WebAssembly embedded within larger programs.

Right now with very little effort (thanks to
[two](https://github.com/bytecodealliance/wasmtime){:target="_blank"}
[libraries](https://github.com/wasmerio/wasmer){:target="_blank"}
alone) you can run WASM programs _in_ all these languages:

* C
* C++
* C#
* Elixir
* Go
* Java
* JavaScript (both inside and outside of a browser)
* PHP
* Postgres
* Python
* R
* Ruby
* Rust

And right now you can compile/convert
[all these languages and more](https://github.com/appcypher/awesome-wasm-langs){:target="_blank"}
into WASM:

* C
* C++
* C#
* COBOL
* Go
* Rust
* TypeScript

WASM is pretty flexible. It has provisions for interacting with the host
environment but it isn't overly opinionated about it. There's a way to call
host-provided functions (called "imports"). This has enabled the WebAssembly
System Interface (WASI) spec, which is basically a pared-down set of POSIX
functions.

Solomon Hykes, the co-founder of Docker,
[said this about WASM+WASI](https://twitter.com/solomonstre/status/1111004913222324225){:target="_blank"}:

> If WASM+WASI existed in 2008, we wouldn't have needed to created (sic) Docker.
  That's how important it is. Webassembly on the server is the future of
  computing. A standardized system interface was the missing link. Let's hope
  WASI is up to the task!

Let me say that again: WASM (plus a spec for some imported functions) can do
everything that Docker does.

These are all Good Things&trade;. These kinds of things make me _very_ excited
as a programmer.

But something fishy is going on. Because it's called _Web_ Assembly.

## Reality: it reeks of internet

[These are some of the people paying for its development](https://www.w3.org/groups/wg/wasm/participants){:target="_blank"}:

* W3C
* Google
* Facebook
* Apple
* Microsoft

What do all of these big-name organizations have in common? The internet.

Now to be fair those aren't the only organizations involved. But...

WASM is opinionated about function calls. It's clear that function calls were
designed in the context of C/C++ and _JavaScript_.

There is a lot of momentum pushing to additionally implement reference types.
And not just reference types but even _null_. And not just that but they are
pushing for _garbage collection instructions_. It's clear from reading the
designers' comments online that the driving force behind these things is again
_JavaScript_.

There is interest in expanding support so that more languages can be compiled to
WASM, but it's clear the goal is always to get those languages to run _in a
browser_.

So which is it? Is it for the web or not?

Why don't they just save garbage collection and reference graphs for a layer
built on top of WASM? Because they want GC languages to be able to run in
today's internet browsers with minimal delay.

If I want to host WASM programs for purposes completely unrelated to the
internet, how long do you think it'll be before I'm forced to introduce internet
concepts into the programs, or into the host? It won't be long until WASM hosts
will have to have garbage collection. Is garbage collection universal outside
the internet? No. Is it universal to JavaScript? Yes.

## Reality: it isn't assembly

I don't know of a single assembly language that:

* Has garbage collection instructions
* Has nullable reference types
* Forces structured control flow

Now I might be wrong. There might be other "assembly" languages with those
things. But those things certainly don't sound like
"[common hardware capabilities](https://webassembly.org/){:target="_blank"}".

> WebAssembly aims to execute at native speed by taking advantage of **common
  hardware capabilities** available on a wide range of platforms.

So why did they call it Web _Assembly_?

## The point

Coming out of the Trough of Disillusionment implies I've crested the Peak of
Inflated Expectations. So what was I expecting?

I was expecting the One Language to Rule Them All. I was expecting a universal
assembly language.

WASM just isn't what I was hoping for.

Is it good for running programs in today's internet browsers? Sure. But I think
it is being influenced too much by today's internet technologies. And we all
know how fast the internet changes.

So I'd stick to the web for WebAssembly.