---
title: Of God and the Holy Trinity
category: god
description: Paragraph two of the 1689 London Baptist Confession
---

[Paragraph two](https://www.the1689confession.com/1689/chapter-2) of the 1689
London Baptist Confession reads:

> The Lord our God is but one only living and true God; whose subsistence is in
  and of Himself, infinite in being and perfection; whose essence cannot be
  comprehended by any but Himself; a most pure spirit, invisible, without body,
  parts, or passions, who only hath immortality, dwelling in the light which no
  man can approach unto; who is immutable, immense, eternal, incomprehensible,
  almighty, every way infinite, most holy, most wise, most free, most absolute;
  working all things according to the counsel of His own immutable and most
  righteous will, for His own glory; most loving, gracious, merciful,
  long-suffering, abundant in goodness and truth, forgiving iniquity,
  transgression, and sin; the rewarder of them that diligently seek Him, and
  withal most just and terrible in His judgments, hating all sin, and who will
  by no means clear the guilty.

## Annoying things

First, there are a few things this paragraph says about God which frustrate me.
I don't want to change them&mdash;I think they're quite accurate to
reality&mdash;but I am quickly frustrated when I think about them.

Let me show you what I mean.

> [God's] essence cannot be comprehended by any but himself

Well, why not? Why isn't it within my abilities to comprehend God? That insults
my pride. Which is annoying.

> [God's] subsistence is in and of himself

I don't comprehend that. I thought I was smart. That's annoying.

> [God] dwells in the light which no man can approach unto

Well I'm fine if _other_ people aren't able to approach unto that light. But I
thought I was special. Why can't _I_ approach unto God's light? That's annoying.

> [God] is only living

> [God] is immutable

I don't think anyone has ever seen something which was both _alive_ and
_immutable_. In fact, I don't think such a thing exists (other than God). And
God isn't just partly alive but is _entirely_ alive. I thought only dead things
were immutable. And all the other things which are now alive are in fact in the
process of changing, of dying. Why can't I comprehend him by comparing him to
something he has made? That's annoying.

## Amazing things

God exhaustively knows everything about himself. And he knows that he knows it.
And he knows that he knows that. And that. And yes, that too. And so on.

As a programmer I'm sort of familiar with recursion. And so I know that
recursion is sort of like that. But at the same time there's something lacking
in my attempts to describe God's knowledge recursively. I think it has to do
with the difference between having an algorithm that can recursively compute
something&mdash;want to know if a number is prime? Easy, just find out if it's
evenly divided by a number other than the number 1&mdash;versus already having
the answer. God already knows what _all_ the prime numbers are. It's not that
God has some procedure he has to follow in order to arrive at his knowledge
(such as "write down 'God knows that. And that. And that' forever). No, God
already _has_ that knowledge in himself.

In fact God has _always_ had all this knowledge. The Divine Nature has never
learned anything because he is immutable.

Furthermore as a programmer I'm acutely aware of how difficult it is to make a
computer originate facts. All I know is how to make it operate on information it
gets from somewhere else. Yet all things exist _by reason of God_.

And to realize that God is also "most loving, gracious, merciful"&mdash;that's
amazing. Furthermore God is "most just and terrible in his judgments, hating all
sin, and who will by no means clear the guilty"&mdash;that's amazing. And to
think that God became a man in order to purchase people from his own wrath by
dying for them&mdash;"amazing" just doesn't do justice to the fact that God is
both just and the justifier of the one who has faith in Jesus Christ.

## The point

Comprehending God is too difficult for me. He is too different. He is too high.
I think my head is going to explode.