---
title: Multi-Wire Branch Circuit
description: Learn with me
category: diy
---
I'm having an electrical sub panel installed in my garage. I've always wanted
more lights and outlets than the current circuits can handle. And plus I'm
beginning to need 240V for power tools.

As I plan ahead I'm having to learn about all the different outlets, wire
gauges, breakers, and circuits related to both 120V and 240V.

One thing I'm learning about is something called a multi-wire branch circuit
(MWBC).

## What is a MWBC

A MWBC gives you two circuits that are out of phase and share a neutral.

Here in the United States the electrical service that comes into your house is
essentially a MWBC. Generally half of the 120V appliances will be on one leg and
the other half will be on the other leg. Bigger appliances that require 240V
service, like an electric stove or HVAC system, will be wired across both legs.
Like this:

```
Transformer | Electrical panel | Appliances

+120V ------ ------------------ ---+-------------+
                                    \             \
                                     | Fridge      |
                                    /              |
Neutral ---- ------------------ ---+               | Stove
                                    \              |
                                     | Microwave   |
                                    /             /
-120V ------ ------------------ ---+-------------+
```

Notice how the 120V fridge and microwave share a common neutral?

## How does it work?

It's important that the two 120V legs are exactly out of phase. When they are
out of phase then the neutral line only has to carry the _difference_ in current
between the two legs. But if the two legs are in phase then it has to carry the
_sum_ of the currents.

In a MWBC (where the 120V legs are out of phase) you can use the same gauge wire
for the neutral as for the two legs. In other words you can use a single 12/3
copper wire to feed two 20A 120V circuits. The highest load the neutral will see
is when one leg is using a lot of current and the other is using none.
Paradoxically, the neutral will see zero current when both legs are using
exactly the same amount of current.

But if the legs were in phase then the neutral would have to be sized to carry
twice the capacity of the legs. The highest load the neutral would see in that
case is when both legs are using a lot of current. And the neutral would only
ever see zero current when neither leg is using any current.

Here's why: in a MWBC if the two legs are using the same amount of current then
the same amount of current will be flowing into one leg as _out_ the other,
because they are exactly out of phase. But if they were in phase then the same
amount of current would be flowing into one leg as _into_ the other, and those
two currents have nowhere to go but through the neutral.

## How do you make one?

Pick an amperage, like 20A. Get a 20A double pole breaker and some 12/3 (which
is rated for 20A) and a NEMA 5-20 (which is rated for 120V 20A) duplex outlet.
The 12/3 will have four conductors in it:
 * Black - one 120V leg
 * White - neutral
 * Red - the other 120V leg
 * Bare copper - ground

Because you're using a double pole breaker then the black and red lines will be
out of phase.

Break the hot tab on your duplex outlet so that the hot side of the two
receptacles are no longer electrically connected.

Then wire it like this:
 * Black -> one receptacle
 * Neutral -> shared neutral
 * Red -> the other receptacle
 * Ground -> shared ground

Tada! You now have an outlet that can pump 20A out of both receptacles at once!

## Rules

In addition to all the rules for normal wiring, a MWBC additionally has these
requirements:

When you flip a breaker it has to turn off both legs. This is to prevent any
nasty surprises when someone flips the breaker to do work inside the outlet's
box&mdash;you want both legs to be dead, not just one of them. A double pole
breaker solves this.

You also must take care that you don't lose the neutral. If you want a MWBC to
feed multiple outlets (not just multiple receptacles, but multiple outlets in a
room) then you have to wire them together in a way that keeps the neutral
connected for all the other outlets if you remove an outlet, or if the neutral
breaks or falls off of an outlet. If you lose the neutral on our example MWBC
above then there will still be 240V between the two hot sides of the receptacles
exactly as there was before. Which in theory is fine without the neutral if both
receptacles are pulling the exact same amount of current. But as soon as there
is a current imbalance then there will be a voltage imbalance&mdash;one device
might see 200V while the other only sees 40V&mdash;a good way to start a fire.
You also get odd behavior such as lights only working while the toaster is on.
Wiring the outlets in with pigtails helps to keep the integrity of the neutral
line independent of the integrity of the outlet.

## The point

A MWBC has to be wired properly to work. But it can be a useful way to get lots
of power out of a single duplex outlet. Or a useful way to put a NEMA 6-20
outlet in the same box as a duplex NEMA 5-20 outlet with only a single 12/3
wire.